---
layout: post
title:  "new article"
author: [ shivani ]
categories: [  ]
download: true
path: _posts/2024/edition_2/2024-05-13-butterfly-effect.md
open_access: true
tags: [ ]
abstract: |
  The nature versus nurture debate which first began as a dichotomy has now evolved towards a unified whole. In the integrative wholistic view, nature and nurture are viewed as synergistic entities that determine outcomes at both the individual and collective domains of a person’s lived experience. When applied to behavior development, both the distinct and unified interpretations of the nature-nurture dynamic may find relevance in the overall discourse. Where prosocial behavior is symbolized by positive attitudes towards others, aggressive behaviors are characterized as negative tendencies that are detrimental to the individual and society (Kogan et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2017). Consequently, prosocial behavior is linked to acceptance within peer group and aggressive behavior is associated with peer rejection (Bornstein & Lamb, 2015). In context of behavior development, each of these domains can be assayed from the nature-nurture perspective which itself can be applied in distinctly contrasting and unified approaches. If viewed from the lens of the nature-nurture dichotomy, is prosocial or aggressive behavior related to genetic expression or is it a function of environmental inputs? Consequently, if understood from the unified perspective, can prosocial or aggressive behavior be a function of both attributes? To this end, the purpose of this paper is to understand how distinct and unified theoretical understandings of the nature-nurture stance inform behavior and intervention so that treatment plans can be optimally applied to foster human growth.
---
The major cognitive characteristics in the teen years include making and testing hypotheses, recognizing that possibility dominates reality, introspecting about their own thought processes, and think abstractly (Bornstein & Lamb, 2015). In terms of social behavior this translates to developing complexity in thought and verbal approaches such as formulating ideas and debating opinions with others, considering many points of views, and thinking about possibilities that influence personal decision making. These approaches influence empathy and social competence skills that predict prosocial behaviors and healthy inter-individual relationships in the environment. Thompson and Gullone (2008) examined associations between attachment and development of empathy in a sample of 281 students aged 12- to 18-year-old. The study investigated direct predictive roles played by attachment and empathy for prosocial and antisocial behaviors directed at both humans and animals as well as the mediating role played by empathy. The study found that attachment and empathy significantly predicted prosocial and antisocial behaviors. Both empathy and attachment are social behaviors linked with the cognitive attribute of considering others’ perspectives. Other developing social behaviors in teens include development of identity and self that is linked to greater autonomy, spending more time with peers, and exploring relationships (Nelson et al., 2018). These behaviors are also linked to developing cognitive skills such as to think and reason in concrete and abstract ways. 

 In terms of differentiation, such distinction is absent from toddlerhood as during that stage there are no boundaries between the physical and psychological and children are present in the moment. Additionally, during younger years when children learn the difference between the subjective and the objective worlds, they hold the concept of consistency. For instance a person smiling must always be happy is the internal understanding at that level. When the child is older, they may realize that inner subjective and outer physical need not be consistent. For instance, it is possible to say that one is happy but not feel happy. At this stage, the child may also experience that they have privileged access to their inner psychological experience (Lapsley & Woodbury, 2016). This is different from early adolescence where the young teen is self-aware of their inner psychological states causing them to act, think, and express emotion from the perspective of their own affect and motivations. This may further inspire self-reflection and the awareness of initiating an action (Lapsley & Woodbury, 2016). Teens also become aware of personal control and intrusive mental experiences. They form exclusive friendships within a tightly bound clique.  This contrasts with the emerging adult stage because during the emerging adult stage understanding of friendship demonstrates greater acknowledgement of the fact that we require dynamic friendships in different contexts based on the complexity of interpersonal needs. Interpersonal understanding and negotiation are at the foundation of emerging adulthood.

 As development of self and identity are central constructs of adolescence and emerging adulthood, sound self-exploration and awareness at both these stages could lay a strong foundation for cognitive wellness and functioning in later years.  For instance, if adolescents are allowed to securely explore their motivations and self-reflections and express them in a safe and validating context its impact on later life cognitive wellness could be explored in terms of the choices for new learnings and its qualitative influence on later life cognitive capabilities. Similarly, one can also explore the meaning of autonomy and its various expressions. Motivating the youth to narrate their emotions could create a long-lasting value for and enhancement of language use in later life years. Individuals who have learned the power to express and narrate emotions will learn verbalization of thought and emotion in later years. This may have a positive influence on later life cognitive functions that relate to problem solving and decision making. 

 ## Separated Understanding

 From the lens of distinctive perspectives, those in the categorical camp of nature would suggest that there is a genetic basis for prosocial or aggressive behavior and those in the domain of nurture would suggest that there is an environmental basis for prosocial or aggressive behavior. Evidence of genetic influences on behavior comes from studies that have highlighted the role of the neurohormone oxytocin in expression of prosocial behaviors in humans. Oxytocin is known to assist facilitative inter-person exchanges that support care giving and empathy. Studies have reported that genetic variations in the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene rs53576 show that the A (minor) allele is associated with lower prosocial behavior (Rodrigues et al., 2009).  It is also known that X-linked MAOA gene, which plays an important role in the degradation of central nervous system serotonin and norepinephrine further suggesting that serotonin (5-HT)- and dopamine related genes are linked with aggressive behaviors in adolescents (Zhang et al., 2017). Although behavior relates to genetic variability, it’s expressive spectrum is also defined by contexts that include more than a few determinants therefore contextual perspective is equally imperative to understanding its expression. From this perspective, environmental factors such as maltreatment, life adversity, and poor neighborhood are predictors of aggressive behavior (Zhang et al., 2017). If viewed solely from the perspective of genetic expression, prosocial and aggressive behavior is a function of the complex interactions between genes and biological and neural pathways that create intra individual changes. Hence pharmacological interventions which impact an individual’s neurobiological pathways would be an illustration of nature-oriented therapies.

 <center id="references">References</center> 

 Bornstein, M. H., & Lamb, M. E. (Eds.). (2015). *Developmental science: An advanced textbook*. Psychology Press.

Kogan A., Saslow L. R., Impett E. A., Oveis C., Keltner D., & Saturn S. R. (2011). Thin-slicing study of the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene and the evaluation and expression of the prosocial disposition. *PNAS* 108 19189--19192\. 10.1073/pnas.1112658108

Masi, G., Milone, A., Manfredi, A., Brovedani, P., & Pisano, S., & Muratori, P. (2016). Combined pharmacotherapy-multimodal psychotherapy in children with disruptive behavior disorders. *Psychiatry Research, 238*, 8-13.

Rodrigues S. M., Saslow L. R., Garcia N., John O. P., & Keltner D. (2009). Oxytocin receptor genetic variation relates to empathy and stress reactivity in humans. *PNAS* 106 21437--21441\. 10.1073/pnas.0909579106

Zhang, Y., Ming, Q., Yi, J., Wang, X., Chai, Q., & Yao, S. (2017). Gene-Gene-Environment Interactions of Serotonin Transporter, Monoamine Oxidase A and Childhood Maltreatment Predict Aggressive Behavior in Chinese Adolescents. *Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 11(17)*, 1-10.


